Professor Forster is such a small man that a special space​suit had to be made for him. But what he lacked in physical size he more than made up-as is often the case-in sheer drive and determination. When I met him, he'd spent twenty years pursuing a dream. What is more to the point, he had per​suaded a whole succession of hard-headed businessmen, World Council delegates, and administrators of scientific trusts to underwrite his expenses and fit out a ship for him. Despite everything that happened later, I still think that was his most remarkable achievement.
The Arnold Toynbee had a crew of six aboard when we left Earth. Besides the Professor and Charles Ashton, his chief assistant, there was the usual pilot-navigator-engineer triumvirate and two graduate students-Bill Hawkins and myself. Neither of us had ever gone into space before, and we were still excited over the whole thing that we didn't care in the least whether we got back to Earth before the next term started.
The Professor looked at us very thoughtfully when we answered his summons. Even under zero g3 he always managed to pre​serve his dignity, while the best we could do was to cling to the nearest handhold and float around like drifting seaweed. I got the impression -though I may of course be wrong-that he was thinking: What have I done to deserve this? as he looked from Bill to me and back again. Then he gave a sort of "It's too late to do anything about it now" sigh and began to speak in that slow, patient way he always does when he has something to explain. At least, he always uses it when he's speaking to us, but it's just occurred to me-oh, never mind.
"Since we left Earth," he said, "I've not had much chance of telling you the purpose of this expedition. Perhaps you've guessed it already."
"I think I have," said Bill.
"Well, go on;' replied the Professor, a peculiar gleam in his eyes. I did my best to stop Bill, but have you ever tried to kick anyone when you're in free fall?”
"You want to find some proof-I mean, some more proof-of your diffusion theory of extraterrestrial culture."
"And have you any idea why I'm going to Jupiter to look for it?"
"Well, not exactly. I suppose you hope to find something on one of the moons."
"Brilliant, Bill, brilliant. There are fifteen known satel​lites, and their total area is about half that of Earth. Where would you start looking if you had a couple of weeks to spare? I'd rather like to know."
Bill glanced doubtfully at the Professor, as if he almost suspected him of sarcasm.
"I don't know much about astronomy," he said. "But there are four big moons, aren't there? I'd start on those." "For your information, Io, Europa, Ganymede, and Callisto are each about as big as Africa. Would you work through them in alphabetical order?"
"No," Bill replied promptly. "I'd start on the one nearest Jupiter and go outward."
"I don't think we'll waste any more time pursuing your logical processes," sighed the Professor. He was obviously impatient to begin his set speech. "Anyway, you're quite wrong. We're not going to the big moons at all. They've been photographically surveyed from space and large areas have been explored on the surface. They've got nothing of archaeological interest. We're going to a place that's never been visited before."
"Not to Jupiter!" I gasped.
"Heavens no, nothing as drastic as that! But we're going nearer to him than anyone else has ever been."
He paused thoughtfully.
"It's a curious thing, you know-or you probably don't​ -that it's nearly as difficult to travel between Jupiter's sat​ellites as it is to go between the planets, although the dis​tances are so much smaller. This is because Jupiter's got such a terrific gravitational field and his moons are travelling so quickly. The innermost moon's moving almost as fast as Earth, and the journey to it from Ganymede costs almost as much fuel as the trip from Earth to Venus, even though it takes only a day and a half.'
"And it's that journey which we're going to make. No one's ever done it before because nobody could think of any good reason for the expense. Jupiter Five is only thirty kilometers in diameter, so it couldn't possibly be of much interest. Even some of the outer satellites, which are far easier to reach, haven't been visited because it hardly seemed worthwhile to waste the rocket fuel."
"Then why are we going to waste it?" I asked impatiently. The whole thing sounded like a complete wild-goose chase, though as long as it proved interesting, and involved no actual danger, I didn't greatly mind.
Perhaps I ought to confess - though I'm tempted to say nothing, as a good many others have done -that at this time I didn't believe a word of Professor Forster's theories. Of course I realized that he was a very brilliant man in his field, but I did draw the line at some of his more fantastic ideas. After all, the evidence was so slight and the conclusions so revolutionary that one could hardly help being skeptical.
Perhaps you can still remember the astonishment when the first Martian expedition found the remains not of one ancient civilization, but of two. Both had been highly advanced, but both had perished more than five million years ago. The reason was unknown (and still is). It did not seem to be warfare, as the two cultures appear to have lived amicably together. One of the races had been insectlike, the other vaguely reptilian. The insects seem to have been the genuine, original Martians. The reptile-people - usually referred to as "Culture X"-had arrived on the scene later.
So, at least, Professor Forster maintained. They had certain​ly possessed the secret of space travel, because the ruins of their peculiar cruciform cities had been found on - of all places - Mercury. Forster believed that they had tried to colonize all the smaller planets-Earth and Venus having been ruled out because of their excessive gravity. It was a source of some disappointment to the Professor that no traces of Culture X had ever been found on the Moon, though he was certain that such a discovery was only a matter of time.
The "conventional" theory of Culture X was that it had orig​inally come from one of the smaller planets or satellites, had made peaceful contact with the Martians - the only other intel​ligent race in the known history of the System - and had died out at the same time as the Martian civilization. But Professor Forster had more ambitious ideas: he was convinced that Culture X had entered the Solar System from interstellar space. The fact that no one else believed this annoyed him, though not very much, for he is one of those people who are happy only when in a minority.
From where I was sitting, I could see Jupiter through the cabin porthole as Professor Forster unfolded his plan. It was a beautiful sight: I could just make out the equatorial cloud belts, and three of the satellites were visible as little stars close to the planet. I wondered which was Ganymede, our first port of call.
"If Jack will condescend to pay attention," the Professor continued, "I'll tell you why we're going such a long way from home. You know that last year I spent a good deal of time poking among the ruins in the twilight belt of Mercury. Perhaps you read the paper I gave on the subject at the Lon​don School of Economics. You may even have been there - I do remember a disturbance at the back of the hall.
"What I didn't tell anyone then was that while I was on Mercury I discovered an important clue to the origin of Cul​ture X. I've kept quiet about it, although I've been sorely tempted when fools like Dr. Haughton have tried to be funny at my expense. But I wasn't going to risk letting someone else get here before I could organize this expedition.
"One of the things I found on Mercury was a rather well​-preserved bas-relief of the Solar System. It's not the first that's been discovered -as you know, astronomical motifs are common in true Martian and Culture X art. But there were certain peculiar symbols against various planets, including Mars and Mercury. I think the pattern had some historic sig​nificance, and the most curious thing about it is that little Jupiter Five - one of the least important of all the satellites - seemed to have the most attention drawn to it I'm convinced that there's something on Five which is the key to the whole problem of Culture X, and I'm going there to discover what it is."
As far as I can remember now, neither Bill nor I was particularly impressed by the Professor's story. Maybe the people of Culture X had left some artifacts on Five for obscure rea​sons of their own. It would be interesting to unearth them, but hardly likely that they would be as important as the Professor thought. I guess he was rather disappointed at our lack of enthusiasm. If so, it was his fault since, as we discovered later, he was still holding out on us.